Summary
-------

AESTextCrypt is a simple open-source tool for encrypting and decrypting text. Primarily
intended for use with email, use it wherever you need to protect text from prying eyes.
The encrypted text can be copy/pasted into any text-handling application (e.g. email)
instead of plain text. Convenience buttons are provided for clipboard operations.
All operations take place in memory - nothing is written to disk.

AESTextCrypt uses AES-256 bit encryption which is the strongest commercially available
encryption scheme. In addition it employs bcrypt, which implements key stretching
and an adaptive key setup phase. This makes it very resistant to dictionary attack.
(See "key stretching" on Wikipedia for more information.)

The password can be any length and any combination of characters that can be entered
from the keyboard. By choosing a reasonably long and complex password, the encrypted
text will be essentially uncrackable - within the lifetime of this universe at least.

AESTextCrypt is written in Java, so can be run on desktop platforms - Windows, Mac
and Linux.

Contents of distribution zip file
---------------------------------

aestextcrypt.jar       executable jar with bc provider
doc.txt                this file
history.txt            version history
legal.txt              legal notices

Installation
------------

1. Extract the executable jar into a suitable directory
2. On Linux, mark it executable.

Execution
---------

Run (open) the executable jar using the Java runtime. On some systems it is
sufficient just to double-click if the Java runtime is the default program
for jar files.

On Windows and Mac, accept the warning relating to an "unknown Java program".

How to use
----------

Encrypting:

Type or copy/paste your text into the text window
Enter a password and click "Encrypt"
Click "Copy to clipboard" to put the encrypted text on the clipboard
Paste to wherever you want

Decrypting:

Copy the encrypted text from wherever it is to the clipboard
Click "Paste from clipboard" to put the encrypted text into the text window
Enter the password and click "Decrypt"
If you supplied the wrong password and decryption fails, you can try again by
clicking "Undo" and re-entering the password

Reduced key length
------------------

The default encryption key length is 256 bits, the highest current available.
However, some systems may not support encryption or decryption above a 128 bit key.

If the encrypting system does not support full length keys, this is automatically
detected and the key length reduced to 128. A check mark will appear beside
"Reduced key length" to indicate this. 

Decryption automatically detects if 128 bit encryption was used, and a check mark
will appear beside "Reduced key length" to indicate this. 

If the decrypting system does not support full length keys, then it will not
be able to decrypt text that was encrypted with a 256 bit key. If you are
encrypting text to send to such a system, check the "Reduced key length" checkbox
to force encryption with the shorter key.

In summary, if encryption or decryption detects that 128 bit encryption is
necessary, a check mark will automatically appear beside "Reduced key length".
However, if you need to force 128 bit encryption because the system would
otherwise use 256 bit, manually check the "Reduced key length" checkbox.

To support 256 bit keys, your system needs to have the JCE Unlimted Strength Policy
files installed. These can be downloaded from the Oracle Java website.

Why you shouldn't worry about using "only" a 128 bit key
--------------------------------------------------------

Even if you are forced to choose encryption using a 128 bit key, it really is
perfectly good enough. The universe will still have come to an end before anyone
is likely to crack it. It isn't that a 128 bit key isn't strong enough, rather
that 256 bit encryption is ridiculouly strong, far more than is really necessary.

(For an interesting explanation of this subject, take a look at this: 
http://blog.agilebits.com/2013/03/09/guess-why-were-moving-to-256-bit-aes-keys)

Passwords
---------

Don't choose a short or trivial password - guessing your password is the only
way a cracker has of breaking the encryption. The more characters you use the
better, and the more variation the better. And for this program you can use any
characters that can be entered through the keyboard, including spaces.

The main problem with complex passwords or passphrases is remembering them. There
is plenty of advice on the internet for creating memorable passwords (e.g. 
http://windows.microsoft.com/en-gb/windows-vista/tips-for-creating-a-strong-password)
so use it!

Chris Wood